Add Aggregate by doc for tracing (#74148)
grafana/grafana: docs/sources/shared/datasources/tempo-search-traceql.md

1. Select a value from the **Select value** drop-down. This field is populated based upon the tag.
1. Optional: Select **+** to add an additional tag.

### Optional: Use Aggregate by

{{% admonition type="warning" %}}
**Aggregate by** is an [experimental feature](/docs/release-life-cycle/). Engineering and on-call support is not available. Documentation is either limited or not provided outside of code comments. No SLA is provided.
[Enable the `metricsSummary` feature toggle](/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/configure-grafana/feature-toggles/) in Grafana to use this feature. Contact Grafana Support to enable this feature in Grafana Cloud.
{{% /admonition %}}

Using **Aggregate by**, you can group RED metrics (span count, erroring span count, and latency information) for `kind=server` spans sent to Tempo in the last hour, grouped by a user-specified attribute.
For example, you can group request rate and latency metrics by attribute for spans of `kind=server`.

This capability is based on the [metrics summary API](/docs/grafana-cloud/monitor-infrastructure/traces/metrics-summary-api/).

To use this capability:

> 1. In the Attribute by row, select an option from the first drop-down box. For example, `span`.

Author: ```suggestion
1. In the **Aggregate by** row, select an option from the first drop-down box. For example, `span`.
```

> 1. In the **Aggregate by** row, select an option from the first drop-down box. For example, `span`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the **Aggregate by** row, select a scope from the first drop-down box. For example, `span`.
```

1. Select a value from the **Select value** drop-down. This field is populated based upon the tag.
1. Optional: Select **+** to add an additional tag.

## Optional: Use Aggregate by

{{% admonition type="warning" %}}
**Aggregate by** is an [experimental feature](/docs/release-life-cycle/). Engineering and on-call support is not available. Documentation is either limited or not provided outside of code comments. No SLA is provided.

> [Enable the `metricsSummary` feature toggle](/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/configure-grafana/feature-toggles/) in Grafana to use this feature. Contact Grafana Support to enable this feature in Grafana Cloud.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[Enable the `metricsSummary` feature toggle](/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/configure-grafana/feature-toggles/) in Grafana to use this feature. Your Grafana Tempo datasource must also point to a Tempo database with the [Metrics Summary API](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/latest/api_docs/metrics-summary/) enabled. Contact Grafana Support to enable this feature in Grafana Cloud.
```

{{% /admonition %}}

> Using **Aggregate by**, you can calculate RED metrics (span count, erroring span count, and latency information) for `kind=server` spans recently sent to Tempo, grouped by one or more attributes.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Using **Aggregate by**, you can calculate RED metrics (total span count, percent erroring spans, and latency information) for spans of `kind=server` that match your filter criteria, grouped by one or more attributes. 
```

Reviewer 2: @joey-grafana -- is the time selector wired up for this feature? I believe in the API we added support for time ranges, so if you say "give me these metrics over the last 10 minutes" we'll calculate those numbers over that exact range. 

I know we can only look back 1 hour in time. So what happens if I say "give me these metrics over the last 2 hours"? I would expect this to fail. What happens if I say "give me these metrics over a 1 hour period that happened 2 days ago"? I would also expect this to fail.

Author: @09jvilla, @mdisibio and I tested this today. The data changed depending upon the selections we chose in the time selector for past 5 minutes, 10 minutes, etc. I was running intro-to-mltp as my test ground.

Reviewer 2: Great! 

Now we have to figure out what happens if the chosen time range includes times older than `(current_time - 1 hour`)!

Whatever is selected in the **Aggregate by** list, you'll see every combination of present in your data.
Each aggregate value, for example `intrinsic`:`name`, has a corresponding column in the results table.

> The RED metrics are calculated for every endpoint and user agent combinations found in your data.

Reviewer 2: I don't understand this right now, but maybe it will make more sense once I see the screenshot.

Author: Screenshot: 
![image](https://github.com/grafana/grafana/assets/104772500/5380901b-b57d-4946-8d95-2e365bd9beaf)

Reviewer 2: Got it. In this case, my suggestion would be 

`The RED metrics are calculated for every name and user agent combination found in your data.`

Suggest using `name` instead of `endpoint` since that's the exact thing shown in the selector.

Author: ```suggestion
The RED metrics are calculated for every name and user agent combination found in your data.
```

> Whatever is selected in the **Aggregate by** list, you'll see every combination of present in your data.
> Each aggregate value, for example `intrinsic`:`name`, has a corresponding column in the results table.
> The RED metrics are calculated for every endpoint and user agent combinations found in your data.

Author: What about this? 

```suggestion
When you use  **Aggregate by**,  the selections you make determine how the information is reported in the Table. Every combination that matches selections in your data is listed in the table. 
Each aggregate value, for example `intrinsic`:`name`, has a corresponding column in the results table.

For example, **names** matching `GET /:endpoint` with a **span.http.user_agent** of `k6/0.46` appeared in 31,466 spans. Instead of being listed by traces and associated spans, the query results are grouped by the the selections in **Aggregate by**.

The RED metrics are calculated for every endpoint and user agent combinations found in your data.
```

![Use Aggregate by to calculate RED metrics for spans and group by attributes](/static/img/docs/tempo/screenshot-traces-aggregate-by.png)

The screenshot shows all of the successful HTTP `status_code` API calls against the `mystical-server` service.
The results are shown in the same order used in **Aggregate by**.
For example, **Aggregate by** lists `intrinsic.name` followed by `span.http.user_agent`.
The first column in the results Table shows **name** and then **span.http.user_agent**.

> This capability is based on the [metrics summary API](/docs/grafana-cloud/monitor-infrastructure/traces/metrics-summary-api/).

Reviewer 2: I see we have this here but I was suggesting we bump it up since this API is off by default in Tempo and we want to let the user know ASAP that without this on, this won't work. 

Perhaps we say something like "If your Grafana Tempo datasource is connected to a Tempo database without the metrics summary API enabled, you will see an error message saying "loadprocessors not found" when you try to use the Aggregate By feature".

Author: Excellent point. I'll add that in.

Author: ```suggestion
```

1. Select a value from the **Select value** drop-down. This field is populated based upon the tag.
1. Optional: Select **+** to add an additional tag.

## Optional: Use Aggregate by

{{% admonition type="warning" %}}
**Aggregate by** is an [experimental feature](/docs/release-life-cycle/). Engineering and on-call support is not available. Documentation is either limited or not provided outside of code comments. No SLA is provided.
[Enable the `metricsSummary` feature toggle](/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/configure-grafana/feature-toggles/) in Grafana to use this feature. Your Grafana Tempo data source must also point to a Tempo database with the [Metrics Summary API](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/latest/api_docs/metrics-summary/) enabled. Contact Grafana Support to enable this feature in Grafana Cloud.
{{% /admonition %}}

Using **Aggregate by**, you can calculate RED metrics (total span count, percent erroring spans, and latency information) for spans of `kind=server` that match your filter criteria, grouped by one or more attributes.

> This capability is based on the [metrics summary API](/docs/grafana-cloud/monitor-infrastructure/traces/metrics-summary-api/).

Author: ```suggestion
This capability is based on the [metrics summary API](/docs/grafana-cloud/monitor-infrastructure/traces/metrics-summary-api/). 
Metrics summary only calculates summaries based on the last hour.
```

Reviewer 2: I tweaked this a bit.

Each aggregate value, for example `intrinsic`:`name`, has a corresponding column in the results table.

For example, **names** matching `GET /:endpoint` with a **span.http.user_agent** of `k6/0.46` appeared in 31,466 spans. Instead of being listed by traces and associated spans, the query results are grouped by the the selections in **Aggregate by**.

The RED metrics are calculated for every name and user agent combination found in your data.

![Use Aggregate by to calculate RED metrics for spans and group by attributes](/static/img/docs/tempo/screenshot-traces-aggregate-by.png)

The screenshot shows all of the successful HTTP `status_code` API calls against the `mystical-server` service.
The results are shown in the same order used in **Aggregate by**.
For example, **Aggregate by** lists `intrinsic.name` followed by `span.http.user_agent`.
The first column in the results Table shows **name** and then **span.http.user_agent**.

To use this capability:

1. In the **Aggregate by** row, select a scope from the first drop-down box. For example, `span`.
1. Select an attribute from the second drop-down.
1. Optional: Select **+** to add an **Aggregate by** row.

> 1. Optional: Select a **Time range** to expand or narrow the data set.

Reviewer: Note: the metrics summary only calculates summaries based on the last hour. So it does use the time range, but only up to an hours range.

Author: Thank you! I will add a note. 
```suggestion
1. Optional: Select a **Time range** to expand or narrow the data set. Data is available for the last hour.
```

Reviewer 2: @joey-grafana -- What happens if I select a time range outside of the last hour? Do I get an error? Or do we still return results but it is just over the last hour of data?

Reviewer 2: Ideally we would return an error that says something along the lines of: "sorry you requested an invalid time range. try again with a time range sometime in the last 1 hour".

1. Select a value from the **Select value** drop-down. This field is populated based upon the tag.
1. Optional: Select **+** to add an additional tag.

## Optional: Use Aggregate by

{{% admonition type="warning" %}}
**Aggregate by** is an [experimental feature](/docs/release-life-cycle/). Engineering and on-call support is not available. Documentation is either limited or not provided outside of code comments. No SLA is provided.
[Enable the `metricsSummary` feature toggle](/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/configure-grafana/feature-toggles/) in Grafana to use this feature. Your Grafana Tempo data source must also point to a Tempo database with the [Metrics Summary API](https://grafana.com/docs/tempo/latest/api_docs/metrics-summary/) enabled. Contact Grafana Support to enable this feature in Grafana Cloud.
{{% /admonition %}}

Using **Aggregate by**, you can calculate RED metrics (total span count, percent erroring spans, and latency information) for spans of `kind=server` that match your filter criteria, grouped by one or more attributes. 

> 

Author: ```suggestion
This capability is based on the [metrics summary API](/docs/grafana-cloud/monitor-infrastructure/traces/metrics-summary-api/).
```

> When you use  **Aggregate by**,  the selections you make determine how the information is reported in the Table. Every combination that matches selections in your data is listed in the table. 

Author: ```suggestion

When you use  **Aggregate by**,  the selections you make determine how the information is reported in the Table. Every combination that matches selections in your data is listed in the table. 
```
